Manzoni redeemed the reputation of his country. The Promessi Sposi, translated into every European language, is a proof that the Italians are still themselves. It yields to no romance of any country in graphic descriptions-in eloquence- in touching incident, and forcible reflection. It is, however, so entirely Italian in all its parts that it can only be truly relished in its native guise. It has seized and individualised, as it were, various species of human beings, specimens of which can be found only in that soil; and thus, to a certain degree, its reputation must be local. Anyone conversant with the Italian character perceives at once the truth and vividness of the picture; to others, it is a fancy piece and cannot come home in the same way to their experience and sympathies. Besides that, the translation is vapid and lifeless, and incapable of communicating the spirit of the original. The excellence of this work consists, in the first place, in its admirable discrimination and representation of character. Its personages are not shadows and vague generalities, but men and women stamped with individuality. They all live and move before us—we feel as if we should recognise them if we saw them—and those who have been in Italy have seen such and perceive not portraits but vivid resemblances. We have seen and recognise Don Abbondio and his servant Perpetua; their modes of thinking and phraseology are all familiar to us, though graced in the work with the ideality which marks the perfection of art. The spirit and reality of such portions as may pass for episodes—the stories of Gertrude and Cristoforo—are unsurpassed in any work, in any language, for interest, truth, and beauty. The riots at Milan, the progress, prevalence, and cessation of the plague, are passages of stirring vividness that carry the reader along with them. They show not only the deepest knowledge of the human heart, but a vivid graphic talent, surpassing that of every modern tale-writer. The defect of the work is its whole. Admirable in parts, it wants the artifice of plot, which should make the interest rise. After the point that Lucia is liberated by the Innominato, the story, such as it is, comes to a halt. Much of this comes from the character of her betrothed. She, gentle, resigned, and affectionate, interests us more than that sort of person in a book usually does; but Renzo is not her fitting lover. It is true that Renzo is nature itself, the absolute portrait of an Italian rustic. We ought to be content that Lucia, a Milanese peasant, should have for a husband a person in the same situation of life; but the sweetness and blameless simplicity of the heroine removes her from the vulgarities of her situation, while Renzo is immersed in them. The discrepancy jars on our taste and injures the tale as a work of art.

The author of The Betrothed (I Promessi Sposi) has not aimed at inspiring ardor for liberty and hatred of the tyrant; his lessons are rather those of piety and resignation. In any other work, we might blame this, but truth is so much better than declamation, and the picture he gives of the evils of misrule and ignorance is so forceful that it stands in lieu of didactic tirades. The effect of the book is to impress the reader with a deep sense of the mischiefs that ensue from a people being kept in a state of bigotry and ignorance and from a foreign, inert, and short-sighted government. Every unprejudiced person must reap a well-founded hatred of tyrants and superstition from such a work, worth a thousand diatribes.

This lack of a generous and enlarged aim is more to be deplored for the author than the work. Manzoni is a man of first-rate genius. Besides The Betrothed, he has written two tragedies—poems rather than dramas, composed according to the French notion of the Athenian theatre but interspersed with choruses. As dramas, these plays are defective; as poems, they are highly beautiful. There is, in particular, a chorus in The Camaldoles on the horrors of war and the blessings of peace, which may rank among the most beautiful lyrics in the Italian language. But the lack of moral energy that blinds a Milanese to the real evils that afflict his country, superstition and despotism, has fallen heavily on the poet. Manzoni has become a bigot and a slave. His life is spent in churches. His thoughts and actions are under the governance of a priest, in obedience to whose dictates he has destroyed a beautiful romance on the subject of Napoleon.

Thus, the system of thought that teaches “Humble thyself, pray, be resigned to thy misfortunes; heaven is thy country, the things of this world are unworthy of thy attention; knowledge is vanity, and justice here below a dream” has fallen with a club-like weight on the head of this illustrious man, crushing his genius, rendering him ungrateful to his Creator for the surpassing gifts of mind lavished on him, causing him to “hide his light under a bushel.” So that, at the great account, when asked to what use he put the vast bounty of God in giving him powers of soul superior to the multitude, he can only answer, “I disdained your gift and regarded the telling of my beads as the chief end and aim of an intelligent being's life.” Miserable, indeed, are the effects of Catholicism, which causes the believer to surrender his conscience into the hands of another; which deprives man of his best privilege, that of judging by his innate sense of right and wrong, and utterly brutalizes him as he regulates his sense of duty by a fictitious code of morality, invented for the sole purpose of enslaving him, instead of resting on the plain precepts of enlightened religion. Enlightened religion teaches us to “love our neighbor as ourselves” and shows that the best use a man of genius can make of his gifts is to enlighten the ignorant and animate virtue in the demoralized—a task that can in no way be so well fulfilled as by multiplying works that will convince the mind of the excellence of right and warm the heart with courage to exercise it.